
--- page 1 ---
arXiv:2404.18938v2  [physics.gen-ph]  6 May 2024
ON POSSIBLE EMBEDDINGS OF THE ST ANDARD MODELS
OF P ARTICLE PHYSICS AND GRA VITY IN E8
ROBERT ARNOTT WILSON
Abstract. I investigate the structure of E8 under the action of the subalge-
bra/subgroup A1 + G2 + C3, as a potential route to uniﬁcation of the funda-
mental forces of nature into a single algebraic structure. T he particular real
form E8(−24) supports a decomposition into compact G2 plus split A1 + C3,
which allows a restriction from G2 to SU (3) for the strong force, together with
split SL2(R) to break the symmetry of the weak interaction and give mass
to the intermediate vector bosons. The factor C3 contains various copies of
the Lorentz group SL2(C) and extends the ‘spacetime’ symmetries to the full
group of symplectic symmetries of real 3 + 3-dimensional pha se space.
Restricting G2 to the Standard Model SU (3) extends C3 to A5, in the real
form SU (3, 3), acting on a complex phase space that includes both moment um
and current. There is then a natural restriction from SU (3, 3) to SO(3, 3),
describing the action of SL4(R) on phase space. The resulting action of SL4(R)
on E8 includes tensors that are equivalent to the stress-energy t ensor, the Ricci
tensor and the Riemann tensor, and therefore permits the for malism of general
relativity to be developed inside E8(−24). The model then suggests unexpected
and perhaps subtle ways in which general relativity and part icle physics may
be forced to modify each other, in order to produce a uniﬁed th eory.
1. Introduction
A number of E8 models of fundamental physics have been proposed in recent
years [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], but none of them has been suﬃciently compelling t o persuade
large numbers of people that they are useful. The key issue is how to split up
the symmetries of E8 to get something that looks like the Standard Model, and
in particular, how to do this in a reasonably ‘natural’ way. In addition t here
are a number of technical issues which cause a lot of trouble, partic ularly to do
with complex structures and chirality, and with implementing three ge nerations of
fermions when there appears on the face of it to be only enough roo m for two [6].
The approach to ‘naturality’ taken in [1] is to take the Freudenthal– Tits ‘magic
square’ [7, 8, 9] as a guide. The Lie structure of the magic square is
A1 A2 C3 F4
A2 A2 + A2 A5 E6
C3 A5 D6 E7
F4 E6 E7 E8
(1)
and most emphasis has been put on the fourth row and the fourth c olumn, where
the exceptional Lie groups are found. However, the other entrie s in the table are
also interesting. For example, the route taken in [1] from top left to bottom right
goes via A2, A5 and E6 in the second row (see also [10, 11]).
Date: First draft: 20th April 2024; this version; 6th May 2024.
1

--- page 2 ---
2 ROBERT ARNOTT WILSON
The corresponding ‘magic square’ for 2 × 2 matrices is
B0 B1 B2 B4
B1 D2 D3 D5
B2 D3 D4 D6
B4 D5 D6 D8
(2)
where I use the notation B and D to emphasise that these are all spin groups, with
Bn = Spin(2n + 1) and Dn = Spin(2n). However, I would like to draw particular
attention to the isomorphisms between spin groups (types B and D) and unitary
(type A) and symplectic (type C) groups:
B1 = A1,
D2 = A1 + A1,
B2 = C2,
D3 = A3.(3)
All of the exceptional isomorphisms listed here arise from the triality automorphism
of D4, which links together all the groups in the table that are not in the fo urth
row or fourth column.
The isomorphism B1 = A1 gives the basic fact that Spin(3) ∼
= SU (2), which
is the foundation of quantum mechanics (QM), while D2 = A1 + A1 extends this
to Spin(3, 1) ∼
= SL(2, C) for relativistic QM. The isomorphism D3 = A3 is needed
to explain the complex structure of the Dirac algebra, as the comple x Cliﬀord
algebra of Minkowski spacetime, since the smallest real Lie algebra t hat contains
all the Dirac matrices, including γ5, is of this type. This isomorphism also plays
a signiﬁcant role in various Grand Uniﬁed Theories (GUTs) from 1974 o nwards
[12, 13, 14], in various real forms including Spin(6) ∼
= SU (4), Spin(4, 2) ∼
= SU (2, 2)
and Spin(3, 3) ∼
= SL4(R). The isomorphism B2 = C2 similarly lies at the heart of
the AdS/CFT correspondence [15], and describes the Lie algebra of the even part
of the Dirac algebra.
Extending then to the 3 × 3 case, we extend C2 to C3, which looks a lot more
‘natural’ than extending B2 to C3. In this note, therefore, I concentrate on the third
row of the magic square [16, 17], and especially the ﬁrst group, Sp6(R), that has
a classical interpretation as the symmetry group of phase space [1 8]. The second
group extends this to a complex phase space, so that both moment um and current
can be included, as well as the position of both mass and charge. This extends the
symplectic group to Sp6(C) ∼
= SU (3, 3), whose centralizer in E8 is SU (3)× SL2(R).
The latter is a real form of the gauge group SU (3) × SU (2) of the strong and weak
nuclear forces, and I shall argue in this paper that the group SU (3, 3) describes
both classical and quantum forms of both electromagnetism and gr avity.
2. Embedding C2 in D8
In the semi-split version of the magic square, both the compact and split real
forms of C2 occur, but because I want to use C2 to implement the Dirac algebra,
I want the split form, that is the group Spin(3, 2) ∼
= Sp4(R). Embedding into
Spin(12, 4) we see the centralizer Spin(9, 2), which we can split into three pieces,
Spin(6), Spin(3) and Spin(2), if we want to get the Standard Model gauge groups
SU (3), SU (2) and U (1). However, the reason for this splitting will not become
clear until we consider the embedding of C3 in E8.

--- page 3 ---
THE STANDARD MODEL AND GRA VITY IN E8 3
In the notation of [1, 19], we need to choose a copy of the split quat ernions
H′ in the split octonions, say the copy with basis U, K, L, KL. Then the corre-
sponding copy of Spin(3, 2) acts on the indices u := 1, U, K, L, KL, leaving IL, J L
for Spin(2), and i, j, k, il, jl, kl for Spin(6) and/or SU (3), so that Spin(3) acts on
l, I, J . In particular we see some symmetry-breaking for Spin(3), generated by XlI ,
XlJ and DI,J , already in the notation. Now for the Dirac part of the algebra, the
labels u, U, K, L, KL correspond to the matrices γ1, γ2, γ3, γ0 and γ5 respectively,
and the products of pairs of these gamma matrices generate the a lgebra so(3, 2):
X1, XK, DK,
XL, DL, DK,L,
XKL, DKL, DK,KL , DL,KL,(4)
in which the ﬁrst row contains the rotations in SL2(C), and the second row contains
the boosts, while the third row contains a Lorentzian 4-vector.
Since this algebra is quaternionic rather than octonionic, its element s can be
written as ordinary 2 × 2 anti-Hermitian quaternion matrices, which make it easier
to understand the structure. The Xs are oﬀ-diagonal, the single-index Ds are
diagonal traceless, and the double-index Ds add the imaginary traces:
( 0 1
− 1 0
)
,
( 0 K
K 0
)
,
( K 0
0 − K
)
,
( 0 L
L 0
)
,
( L 0
0 − L
)
,
( KL 0
0 KL
)
,
( 0 KL
KL 0
)
,
( KL 0
0 − KL
)
,
( L 0
0 L
)
,
( K 0
0 K
)
(5)
These matrices can be regarded as a split quaternionic version of th e Pauli matrices,
which occur in the ﬁrst row, in the mathematicians’ anti-Hermitian co nvention
rather than the physicists’ Hermitian convention. The last matrix in the third row
is the scalar matrix that is the product of the three Pauli matrices ( Hermitian
convention).
3. Extending to C3
To extend from C2 to C3 we have to generalise the X terms to Y and Z, and
the D terms to E:
Y1, YK, YL, YKL,
Z1, ZK, ZL, ZKL,
EK, EL, EKL.(6)
Equivalently, we extend from 2 × 2 matrices to 3 × 3, to obtain a split quaternionic
version of the Gell-Mann matrices [20]. It turns out that the ‘scalar ’ 2 × 2 matrices
extend to traceless 3 × 3 matrices, in the same way that the Gell-Mann matrices
are traceless. In the notation of [19], this condition is enforced by t he identity:
Dp + Ep + Fp = 0 (7)
for all single index p, here K, L and KL. I make no claims as to how these Gell-
Mann matrices should be interpreted, or whether they have anyth ing to do with
the Gell-Mann matrices used in QCD [21].

--- page 4 ---
4 ROBERT ARNOTT WILSON
In fact, the compact part of this group Sp6(R) is a copy of U (3) generated by
all the elements that have an even number of copies of L in their labels:
X1, XK, Y1, YK, Z1, ZK, DK, EK, DL,KL(8)
where again the double-index Ds add an imaginary trace to the matrices. As
matrices, these are just the anti-Hermitian matrices over the com plex subalgebra
C of H′. There are also two copies of GL3(R) obtained by replacing K by L or KL
(or indeed any linear combination of the two):
X1, XL, Y1, YL, Z1, ZL, DL, EL, DK,KL ;
X1, XKL, Y1, YKL, Z1, ZKL, DKL , EKL, DK,L.(9)
These are anti-Hermitian matrices over the respective copies of th e split complex
numbers C′ in H′. Leaving oﬀ the double-index Ds restricts to SL3(R), and the
subtle relationships between these two copies of SL3(R) and SU (3) will play an
important role in this paper.
4. The centralizer of C3
The centralizer of Sp6(R) in E8 is a group of type A1 + G2, in which the copy
of G2 is compact, acting on the indices i, j, k, l, il, jl, kl, and the copy of A1 is
split, acting on the indices I, J, IL, J L in one of its chiral spinor (weak isospin?)
representations. This copy of A1 is obviously not the same as the copy, acting
on l, I, J , that we suggested in Section 2 simply by looking in D8. However, we
eﬀectively chose a copy of su(2) + u(1) acting on l, I, J, IL, J L, so that by ‘mixing’
DI,J with DIL,JL we obtain one of the elements of the centralizer. To get the
rest we need to replace XlI and XlJ by one combination of DI,IL and DJ,JL and
another combination of DI,JL and DJ,IL.
In other words, the conversion between these two copies of A1, one of which
is compact and the other split, is very reminiscent of the ‘symmetry- breaking’ of
the weak SU (2) in the Standard Model, that converts from a ‘primordial’ massles s
SU (2) to SL2(R) via the complexiﬁcation SL2(C), in order to give the intermediate
vector bosons non-zero masses. Thus the E8 model provides a fundamental math-
ematical reason for this symmetry-breaking, namely enforcemen t of the condition
that the gauge group must commute not only with D2, as the Coleman–Mandula
theorem [22] requires, or with C2, as the embedding in D8 requires, but with the
whole of C3.
To see the details of how these two copies of A1 are related to each other, we
can work in the group they generate, which is another copy of Spin(3, 2), acting on
the labels l, I, J, IL, J L, and commuting with the ﬁrst copy. The ten dimensions of
this group are represented by
XlI , XlJ , DI,J , DIL,JL ,
XlIL , XlJL , DI,IL , DI,JL , DJ,IL, DJ,JL.(10)
Since we are genuinely using the octonions at this point, it is not possib le to write
these elements of the algebra as ordinary matrices. However, the notation of [19]
may help to visualise what is going on. The generators of the two copie s of A1 are
related as follows (where the signs are determined by the chirality, o r equivalently

--- page 5 ---
THE STANDARD MODEL AND GRA VITY IN E8 5
by the embedding in G2):
DI,J → DI,J − DIL,JL
XlI → DI,IL − DJ,JL
XlJ → DJ,IL + DI,JL .(11)
Turning now to the remaining factor, which is presumably related to t he strong
force, we compare the group Spin(6) that appears in the centralizer of Spin(3, 2),
with the group G2 that appears in the centralizer of Sp6(R). After replacing the
original (unbroken symmetry) copy of A1 by the chiral copy on I, J, IL, J L, we no
longer require the label l for the weak interaction, which can be added to the strong
force, to extend the gauge group SU (3) acting on 3 + 3 colours and anti-colours to
G2 acting on 7 ‘colours’. This extension is reminiscent of the Pati–Salam mo del,
which uses SU (4) for four colours and four anti-colours, but is group-theoret ically
completely diﬀerent.
Notice also that we have a chiral pair of left-handed and right-hand ed copies of
SL2(R), so that there is a close parallel between the two models:
SU (4) × SU (2)L × SU (2)R
G2 × SL2(R)L × SL2(R)R.(12)
Generators for SL2(R)R in this case are obtained by changing the signs in (11).
But this group SL2(R)R is not contained in Sp6(R), so we do not ﬁnd it useful,
and shall not use it. In Section 5 we consider a diﬀerent type of ‘right -handed’
SL2(R), whose generators are given in (22), which is contained in Sp6(R), and has
more useful symmetry properties.
Here we have a total of 20 degrees of freedom, compared to 21 in t he Pati–Salam
model. Therefore our full model is of type C3 + A1 + G2, based on the group
Sp6(R) × SL2(R) × G2,(13)
with the ﬁrst factor generalising the Lorentz group, the second f actor representing
a real form of weak SU (2), and the third factor generalizing strong SU (3).
5. Extending to A5
The occurrence of G2 in the decomposition A1 +G2 +C3, rather than A2, that we
would expect for the strong force, suggests that we should move to the second group
in the third row of the magic square, of type A5, and the associated decomposition
A1 + A2 + A5 of E8. The particular real forms that arise are
SL2(R) × SU (3) × SU (3, 3),(14)
which is analogous to the decomposition
SU (2) × SL3(R) × SL3(H) (15)
studied in [1, Section II.C]. I propose these diﬀerent real forms as a potentially closer
match to the Standard Model, since the compact group SU (3) is more suitable for
massless gluons, while the split group SL2(R) has two boosts that are suitable for
masses of the intermediate vector bosons. This is because mass is u sually introduced
by complexifying the compact gauge group, precisely in order to gen erate boosts.